content/has-selector.mdx, before:

---
title: CSS :has selector
banner: /images/has-selector/og.jpeg
description: Learn about the powerful :has CSS pseudo-class for selecting elements based on the existence of other elements within them.
date: 2023-02-17
tags:
  - CSS
---

The `:has` pseudo-class, which enables you to select items based on the existence of other elements within them, is one of the most recent additions to CSS. The `:has` pseudo-class will be used instead of the `:contains`, which may be computationally costly and is not commonly supported, as we study the advanced features of the `:has` pseudo-class in this tutorial.

## The basics of the `:has` pseudo-class

To select items based on the existence of other elements within them, use the `:has` pseudo-class. For instance, the CSS rule that follows selects all `div` elements that include a `a` element:

```css
div:has(a) {
  background-color: red;
}
```

No matter what the content of the `a` element is, this selects all `div` components that include it.

The `:has` pseudo-class can also be used to select components depending on the attributes or properties of their children. For instance, the following CSS rule selects all `div` elements that include `a` elements with `href` attributes that starts with `https://`:

```css
div:has(a[href^="https://"])
{
  color: pink;
}
```

By doing this, all `div` elements that have a `a` element whose `href` attribute starts with `https://` are selected. Other attribute selectors, including `=` for exact matches and `$=` for suffix matches, are also available.

## Advanced techniques

To use more complex queries, you can combine the `:has` pseudo-class with other selectors. The `:not` pseudo-class, for instance, can be used to select items that don't contain a specific element. When making exceptions to a more general rule, this can be effective.

```css
div:not(:has(p)) {
  border: 1px solid pink;
}
```

With the addition of a border, this selects all `div` elements that do not contain any `p` elements. To create more complicated searches, you can also use `:not` with selectors like `:first-child` or attribute selectors.

The `:has` pseudo-class can also be used to select elements based on their descendent structure. You can, for instance, select all `li` elements that contain a `a` element, followed by a `span` element:

```css
li:has(a + span) {
  background-color: pink;
}
```

The `:has` pseudo-class can also be used to select items based on the status of their children. You can select all `label` elements that contain a checked `input` element, for instance:

```css
label:has(input:checked) {
  background-color: pink;
}
```

This selects all `label` elements that contain an `input` element that is checked. If you want to target other states of the `input` element, you can use any other pseudo-class or attribute selector in place of `:checked`.

## Conclusion

The computationally expensive `:contains` pseudo-class can be avoided by using the dynamic and complex style provided by the `:has` pseudo-class, which is based on child elements. Advanced CSS techniques can be used to increase CSS proficiency.

Commit message:

refactor: enhance explanation and structure of the :has CSS pseudo-class tutorial

content/has-selector.mdx, after:

---
title: CSS :has selector
banner: /images/has-selector/og.jpeg
description: Learn about the powerful :has CSS pseudo-class for selecting elements based on the existence of other elements within them.
date: 2023-02-17
tags:
  - CSS
---

When I first started learning CSS, I quickly realized there was one thing I couldn’t do: **style a parent element based on what was inside it**.
If I wanted that, I had to use JavaScript or add extra classes manually.

Then I found the `:has` pseudo-class — and it felt like unlocking a hidden superpower.
Now CSS can actually _“look inside”_ an element and style it based on its children.

## Why It’s a Big Deal

With `:has`, you can style an element if it contains something specific inside it. For example:

```css
div:has(a) {
  background-color: red;
}
```

Every `<div>` with a link turns red. No scripting, no class juggling.

You can even target based on attributes:

```css
div:has(a[href^="https://"])
{
  color: pink;
}
```

Now you’re only styling `<div>` elements with secure links.

## Combining Powers

The fun starts when you mix it with other selectors. For example:

```css
div:not(:has(p)) {
  border: 1px solid pink;
}
```

That means “give a border to every div that doesn’t have a paragraph.”

Or get really specific:

```css
li:has(a + span) {
  background-color: pink;
}
```

That matches list items with a link immediately followed by a span.

## Styling by State

One of my favorite tricks:

```css
label:has(input:checked) {
  background-color: pink;
}
```

That’s all it takes to style a label when its checkbox is checked — no JavaScript listeners needed.

## My Take

`:has` feels like one of those CSS features we’ll look back on and wonder how we lived without. It keeps styling logic where it belongs — in the CSS — and removes a ton of messy DOM manipulation.

It’s not something I use every day, but when the problem calls for it, it’s elegant, declarative, and surprisingly powerful. If you haven’t played with it yet, spin up a CodePen and see what parent-aware CSS can do for you.
